# Sorting-Algorithms

Sorting is arranging a collection of elements or data in a specific order, typically in ascending or descending order
based on the elements' values. Sorting is a fundamental operation in programming used to organize data for various
purposes, such as searching, reporting, and data analysis. Sorting can be applied to various data structures, including
arrays and lists, and can be performed using built-in methods or custom sorting logic. Sorting ensures that data is
ordered and accessible in a structured manner, making it easier to work with and process.

<br>
<h2>üëâüèª Features:</h2>

a) _Ordering_: Sorting organizes items in a structured way, facilitating quick access and retrieval.

b) _Stability_: Some sorting methods maintain the original order of items with the same value, ensuring consistency.

c) _Customization_: You can sort items based on various criteria, allowing customization to suit specific needs.

d) _Applicability_: Sorting is used in various real-life scenarios, from managing phone contacts to organizing tasks in
a to-do list.

<br>
<h2>üëâüèª Daily Life Examples:</h2>

a) <i>Phone Contacts</i>: Arranging your contacts in alphabetical order by their last names for easy access.

b) _Library Catalog_: Sorting books on library shelves by title or author's last name for efficient book retrieval.

c) _To-Do List_: Ordering tasks by priority or due date to ensure the most critical tasks are addressed first.

d) _Spreadsheets_: Sorting data in columns for effective data analysis and comparison.

e) _Online Shopping_: Displaying search results based on price, rating, or relevance to aid decision-making.

f) _Music Playlist_: Rearranging songs in a playlist by an artist or album to create a personalized listening
experience.

<br>
<h2>üëâüèª Sorting Algorithms:</h2>

Below are the top 30 sorting algorithms that can be used to efficiently organize and arrange data. These algorithms are
valuable tools for developers and data scientists, offering a diverse range of approaches to sorting, each with its
unique characteristics and performance advantages. Whether it's a simple list of names or complex data structures, these
sorting methods empower us to streamline data and access it with ease.

<b>1) Selection Sort:</b>

Selection Sort is a straightforward sorting algorithm that works by repeatedly finding the minimum element from the
unsorted portion of the array and moving it to the sorted portion. It divides the input array into two parts, one sorted
and...[_Read more_](https://github.com/Tanay-Dwivedi/Sorting-Algorithms/tree/master/src/SelectionSort)

<b>2) Bubble Sort:</b>

Bubble Sort is a basic sorting technique that repeatedly steps through the list of elements, compares adjacent elements,
and swaps them if they are in the wrong order. It gets its name from the way smaller elements "bubble" to the top of...[
_Read more_](https://github.com/Tanay-Dwivedi/Sorting-Algorithms/tree/master/src/BubbleSort)

<b>3) Insertion Sort:</b>

Insertion Sort is a simple sorting algorithm that builds the final sorted array one element at a time. It takes one
element from the input data and inserts it into its correct position within the...[_Read
more_](https://github.com/Tanay-Dwivedi/Sorting-Algorithms/tree/master/src/InsertionSort)

<b>4) Merge Sort:</b>

Merge Sort is a divide-and-conquer sorting algorithm. It divides the unsorted list into N sub-lists, each containing one
element, and then repeatedly merges sub-lists to produce...[_Read
more_](https://github.com/Tanay-Dwivedi/Sorting-Algorithms/tree/master/src/MergeSort)

<b>5) Quick Sort:</b>

Quick Sort is a highly efficient sorting algorithm that uses a divide-and-conquer approach. It selects a 'pivot' element
and rearranges the array so that all elements less than the...[_Read
more_](https://github.com/Tanay-Dwivedi/Sorting-Algorithms/tree/master/src/QuickSort)

<b>6) Heap Sort:</b>

Heap Sort is a comparison-based sorting algorithm that leverages the properties of a binary heap data structure. It
first builds a binary heap from the array and then repeatedly removes the maximum element from the heap and places
it...[_Read more_](https://github.com/Tanay-Dwivedi/Sorting-Algorithms/tree/master/src/HeapSort)
